## preamble
2022 research-article INC 0010.1 77/1751 437221 49572Journal of the Intensive Care Society Koozi et al. Original article

## A simple mortality prediction model for sepsis patients in intensive care
Hazem Koozi 1,2* , Adina Lidestam 1* , Maria Lengquist 1,3 , Patrik Johnsson 1,4  and Attila Frigyesi 1,3

## Abstract
Background: Sepsis is common in the intensive care unit (ICU). Two of the ICU's most widely used mortality prediction models are the Simplified Acute Physiology Score 3 (SAPS-3) and the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score. We aimed to assess the mortality prediction performance of SAPS-3 and SOFA upon ICU admission for sepsis and find a simpler mortality prediction model for these patients to be used in clinical practice and when conducting studies. Methods: A  retrospective  study  of  adult  patients  fulfilling  the  Sepsis-3  criteria  admitted  to  four  general  ICUs  was performed. A simple prognostic model was created using backward stepwise multivariate logistic regression. The area under the curve (AUC) of SAPS-3, SOFA and the simple model was assessed. Results: One thousand nine hundred eighty four admissions were included. A simple six-parameter model consisting of age, immunosuppression, Glasgow Coma Scale, body temperature, C-reactive protein and bilirubin had an AUC of 0.72 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.69-0.75) for 30-day mortality, which was non-inferior to SAPS-3 (AUC 0.75, 95% CI 0.72-0.77) ( p =  0.071). SOFA had an AUC of 0.67 (95% CI 0.64-0.70) and was inferior to SAPS-3 ( p < 0.001) and our simple model ( p =  0.0019). Conclusion: SAPS-3 has a lower prognostic value in sepsis than in the general ICU population. SOFA performs less well than SAPS-3. Our simple six-parameter model predicts mortality just as well as SAPS-3 upon ICU admission for sepsis, allowing the design of simple studies and performance monitoring.

## Keywords
Critical care, intensive care units, mortality, prognosis, risk adjustment, sepsis

## Background
Sepsis is one of the most frequent diagnoses in intensive care units (ICUs), accounting for around 30% of all ICU admissions  in  Europe. 1,2   It  is  also  one  of  the  leading causes of death in the world. 3  The criteria for sepsis are suspected or documented infection and an acute increase of  two  Sequential  Organ  Failure  Assessment  (SOFA) points or more. 4 The  high  incidence  and  mortality  of  sepsis  make reliable and easy ICU prognostication of septic patients crucial.  The  Acute  Physiologic  and  Chronic  Health Evaluation  II  (APACHE  II)  and  the  Simplified  Acute Physiology Score 3 (SAPS-3) are two of the most commonly used models for the assessment of illness severity and prediction of outcomes in the ICU. 5  While SAPS-3 has been shown to have high sensitivity and specificity, it  is  developed  for  a  mixed  ICU  cohort. 6   However, the ICU population is heterogeneous, and neither SAPS-3 nor APACHE scores are designed to estimate mortality rates  for  any  specific  ICU  subgroup.  Both  SAPS-3 and APACHE II have demonstrated good mortality prediction in  postoperative  surgical  patients. 7   Studies  have  also shown SAPS-3 to have good discriminatory power and calibration,  although  overestimating  hospital  mortality in  a  mixed  ICU  population. 8-12   However,  studies  have indicated  that  SAPS-3  is  challenging  to  use  in  clinical practice due to its many variables. 13  The SOFA score has previously  demonstrated  good  prognostic  accuracy  in predicting  hospital  mortality  in  patients  with  suspected infection admitted to the ICU. Still, it is mainly intended for measuring and monitoring organ failure. 14,15 1   Department of Clinical Medicine, Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care, Lund University, Lund, Sweden 2   Kristianstad Central Hospital, Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, Kristianstad, Sweden 3   Skåne University Hospital, Intensive and Perioperative Care, Lund, Sweden 4   Skåne University Hospital, Intensive and Perioperative Care, Malmö, Sweden *These authors contributed equally to this work.

## Corresponding author:
Hazem Koozi, Kristianstad Central Hospital, Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, J A Hedlunds väg 5, Kristianstad, Skåne SE-29133, Sweden. Email: hazem.koozi@med.lu.se Journal of the Intensive Care Society 2023, Vol. 24(4) 372  -378 © The Intensive Care Society 2022 https://doi.org/10.1177/17511437221149572 Article reuse guidelines: sagepub.com/journals-permissions DOI: 10.1177/17511437221149572 journals.sagepub.com/home/jics

## Objectives
This  study  aimed  to  assess  the  prognostic  performance regarding  mortality  of  SAPS-3  and  SOFA  score  for patients with sepsis (according to Sepsis-3) admitted to the ICU and to find a simpler model with fewer parameters  but  maintained  predictive  value.  Such  a  mortality prediction model could facilitate future studies and performance monitoring.

## Study design and setting
This  study  was  a  retrospective  multicentre  observational study including adult patients fulfilling the Sepsis-3 criteria admitted to one of four mixed surgical and medical ICUs between 2015 and 2018. This study did not include patients admitted to specialised ICUs (cardiothoracic or neurosurgical).  The  Strengthening  the  Reporting  of  Observational Studies  in  Epidemiology  (STROBE)  guidelines  were followed. 16

## Participants
Patients fulfilling the Sepsis-3 criteria with a total SOFA score of 2 or more on ICU admission were included. All admitted patients had an assumed baseline SOFA score of 0. To establish the presence of suspected infection, included admissions had to fulfil the following criteria: At least one blood culture collected within 24  h of ICU admission and antibiotics  administrated  within  24  h  before  to  72  h  after blood culture collection. These criteria were in accordance with the Sepsis-3 guidelines. 4  Patients directly transferred from  another  ICU,  planned  ICU  admissions  following elective surgery and patients with cardiac arrest within 6  h prior, to 1  h after ICU admission were excluded.

## Data sources
Data collection was performed by multiple trained data collectors  using  standardised  and  clearly  defined  guidelines. Data such as comorbidities, physiological parameters and laboratory findings were collected from electronic medical records. In addition, SOFA parameters, survival data, age and  sex  were  collected  from  the  Patient  Administrative System for Intensive Care Units (PASIV A).

## Variables
The worst recorded value 6  h prior, to 1  h after ICU admission was documented regarding physiological and laboratory parameters. SOFA and SAPS-3 scores were calculated based on the worst recorded values 1 h prior, to 1  h after ICU admission. Immunosuppression was defined as immunosuppressive treatment such as chemotherapy or neutropaenia with absolute neutrophil count < 1.5 × 10 9 /L before ICU admission. Corticosteroid treatment was only recorded for a treatment duration of more than 3  days before ICU admission.  Septic  shock  was  defined  as  vasopressor  use and  lactate > 2  mmol/L  at  ICU  admission.  The  patients were divided into two subgroups based on the outcome: Alive more than 30 days after ICU admission (survivors) and dead within 30 days from ICU admission (non-survivors).  We  used  the  Swedish  2016  SAPS-3  calibration, which estimates the 30-day mortality, to calculate the estimated mortality ratio (EMR). 17  Therefore, we used 30-day mortality  as  the  mortality  measure  when  dividing  the patients.

## Statistics
The two-sample Wilcoxon rank-sum test (Mann-Whitney U-test) was used to test for a difference in the continuous variable's median. The two-proportions Z-test (Chisquared test) was used to test for a difference in proportions. p -Values of less than 0.05 were considered significant. Backward  stepwise  multivariate  logistic  regression  was performed with 30-day mortality as the outcome and the parameters with the highest significance from the univariate logistic regression as factors. This method begins with a  complete  model  including  several  variables  and  then removes  one  variable  after  another  to  create  a  reduced model with the most significant independent variables. The area  under  the  receiver  operating  characteristic  (ROC) curve (AUC) was used to assess the predictive power of our models. Differences in AUC were tested with a method by DeLong et al. 18

## Ethics
This study was approved by a Regional Ethical Review Board and conformed to the Declaration of Helsinki.

## Participants
A total of 7556 ICU admissions were identified, where 2223  admissions  fulfilled  the  inclusion  criteria,  222 admissions were excluded, and 17 patients were lost to follow-up. Therefore, the total number of patients included in the study was 1984.

## Descriptive statistics
The 30-day mortality was 25.3%. Survivors were younger than  non-survivors  ( p < 0.001).  Septic  shock  was  more common  in  non-survivors  than  survivors  ( p < 0.001). Survivors were likelier to have a higher body mass index (BMI)  than  non-survivors  ( p =  0.028). No  difference between the sexes regarding 30-day mortality could be found. The median SAPS-3 score at ICU admission was 63  for  survivors  and  74  for  non-survivors. The  median SOFA score at ICU admission was seven for survivors and nine for non-survivors. See Table 1. Our analyses found almost all documented comorbidities  to  be  more  frequent  in  non-survivors  than  survivors, except for asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease BMI: body mass index; SAPS: Simplified Acute Physiology Score; EMR: estimated mortality rate; SOFA: Sequential Organ Failure Assessment; Table 1. Characteristics of the studied patient population. TIA: transient ischaemic attack; COPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; GCS: Glasgow Coma Scale; SpO 2 : peripheral oxygen saturation; CRP: C-reactive protein; WBC: white blood cell count; APTT: activated partial thromboplastin time; pH: hydrogen ion concentration. Values presented as medians and interquartile range or percentages, with the exception of GCS, which is presented as means and standard deviations (SD). *Calculated using the two-samples Wilcoxon rank-sum test (Mann-Whitney U-test) and the two-proportions Z-test (Chi-squared test) as appropriate. (COPD), which was more common among survivors than non-survivors. Only 14.9% of patients in the non-survivor group had a diagnosis of asthma or COPD, compared to 20.5% of patients in the survivor group ( p =  0.0075). The prevalence  of  documented  comorbidities  did  not  differ between  survivors  and  non-survivors  regarding  diabetes mellitus (type I and II), ischaemic heart disease, atrial fibrillation and renal disease. See Table 1. Non-survivors  had  lower  systolic  blood  pressure, higher  respiratory  rate,  lower  Glasgow  Coma  Scale (GCS) score, lower peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO 2 ) and lower body temperature than survivors. A higher percentage of non-survivors than survivors needed vasopressor support (44.2% and 25.3%, respectively). There was no  difference  in  heart  rate  between  the  two  groups ( p =  0.32).  Non-survivors  had  higher  C-reactive  protein Figure 1. Multivariate logistic regression of a simple sixparameter model consisting of age, immunosuppression, Glasgow Coma Scale, body temperature, C-reactive protein and bilirubin in predicting 30-day mortality in sepsis patients admitted to the ICU. ICU: intensive care unit; GCS: Glasgow Coma Scale; CRP: C-reactive protein. (CRP) levels, lower platelet counts, higher lactate levels, higher  creatinine  levels  and  higher  bilirubin  levels.  No difference was observed between the two groups regarding white blood cell count (WBC). See Table 1.

## Multivariate logistic regression
Out of the 36 parameters in Table 1, 24 were significant in univariate logistic regression analyses (see Supplemental Material).  Subsequently,  these  24  were  used  in  a  backward  stepwise  multivariate  logistic  regression  analysis. Several  simpler  models  were  created  using  backward stepwise multivariate logistic regression, each including four to six variables, and the simple model with the highest AUC was chosen. A six-parameter model was found with odds ratios (OR) of more than one for age, immunosuppression, CRP and bilirubin and OR of less than one for GCS score and body temperature. See Figure 1. SAPS-3, on ICU admission, had an AUC of 0.75 (95% CI 0.72-0.77). Our six-parameter model had an AUC of 0.72 (95% CI 0.69-0.75) with no difference in predictive strength  compared  to  SAPS-3  ( p =  0.071).  SOFA  score upon ICU admission had an AUC of 0.67 (95% CI 0.640.70). Both SAPS-3 and our model had a better predictive value  than  the  SOFA  score  ( p < 0.001  and p =  0.0019, respectively). See Figure 2. Internal  validation  of  the  six-parameter  model  was undertaken  through  five-fold  cross-validation  with  50 repeats, which yielded an  AUC  of  0.71 (95%  CI 0.66-0.76).

## Discussion
SAPS-3 is a well-known and widely used model in ICUs worldwide. SAPS-3 is well-studied in general ICU populations and has relatively high sensitivity and specificity, with  several  studies  showing  an AUC  of  0.80-0.85. 8-11 This is further supported by a recent study in a large general ICU population, which showed an AUC of 0.85 for SAPS-3. 19   However,  SAPS-3  is  not  explicitly  designed for  sepsis  patients,  and  the  discriminative  power  of SAPS-3  was  notably  lower  in  our  analyses  in  a  sepsis population, with an AUC of 0.75. Thus, our findings suggest that the performance of SAPS-3 in a sepsis population is lower than in a general ICU population, which is important since sepsis is common in the ICU. 1,2  SAPS-3 also requires extensive clinical information, which limits its use. Another potential mortality prediction model for sepsis patients in the ICU is the SOFA score. The SOFA score has previously been shown to predict hospital mortality  in  ICU  patients  adequately. 20   Like  our  model,  it also consists of six parameters and is thus simpler than SAPS-3. Both the SOFA score and our model include the GCS score and bilirubin levels. However, the SOFA score did not perform well in this study compared to our model and SAPS-3. The SOFA score is not mainly intended for mortality prediction but rather to estimate and monitor the degree of organ dysfunction. One could argue that the SOFA  score  complements  mortality  prediction  tools rather than replaces them. 15 Figure 2. ROC curves and AUC for SAPS-3, SOFA score, and a simple six-parameter model consisting of age, immunosuppression, Glasgow Coma Scale, body temperature, C-reactive protein and bilirubin in predicting 30-day mortality in sepsis patients admitted to the ICU. ROC: receiver operating characteristic; AUC: area under curve; SAPS: Simplified Acute Physiology Score; SOFA: Sequential Organ Failure Assessment; ICU: intensive care unit. We found a simple six-parameter model that was as good as SAPS-3 in the Sepsis-3 population in our large cohort. This model suggests a higher risk of death within 30 days of ICU admission with advanced age, immunosuppression,  low  GCS  score,  low  body  temperature, increased CRP level and increased bilirubin level. It combines measures of systemic inflammation (CRP), immune dysregulation (normo- or hypothermia during sepsis) and organ dysfunction (GCS score and bilirubin). Finding age and immunosuppression to be important prognostic factors was no surprise. This model is more straightforward and takes less time to document than SAPS-3, which contains  20  parameters.  The  parameters  needed  to  predict 30-day mortality with this model are usually recorded at admission and daily on patients with sepsis in the ICU. Only immunosuppression is needed from the medical history. It includes only two laboratory values and does not require blood gas analysis. Additionally, fewer parameters also minimise the risk of  error.  Since  sepsis  accounts  for  around  a  third  of  all ICU admissions, a simple predictive model for mortality adapted for patients with sepsis is relevant. Such a model would benefit low- and middle-income countries (LMIC) ICUs. Common challenges for ICU prognostic models in LMICs are a lack of laboratory testing resources and a lack  of  staff  training  and  availability,  which  results  in missing or inaccurate parameter values. 21  A model containing  only  six  parameters  would  facilitate  quick  and correct  documentation.  Both  CRP  and  bilirubin  can  be analysed  relatively  rapidly  and  cheaply. Age,  immunosuppression, GCS score and body temperature can all be obtained bedside quickly. The association between low or normal body temperature  and  increased  mortality  in  sepsis  is  reflected  in SAPS-3 and supported by several studies  showing  that hypo- and normothermia in patients with sepsis requiring intensive  care  increase  mortality. 22-24   As  with  SAPS-3 and  SOFA, our model also includes bilirubin.  Previous studies have found that elevated bilirubin levels at ICU admission are an early independent predictor of mortality in patients with sepsis. 25,26  Interestingly, our analyses suggest that CRP and lactate have important prognostic values in sepsis. Both CRP and lactate are variables that are routinely analysed but not included in any standard mortality  prediction  model  in  the  ICU.  We  found  elevated CRP levels to be prognostic and thus included it in our simplified model. In a separate publication, our research group previously explored the finding that CRP is a strong independent  prognostic  marker  for  30-day  mortality. 27 Elevated  lactate  levels  were  strongly  correlated  with 30-day mortality in this study's univariate logistic regression results, and similar results can be seen in previous studies. 28,29   Though,  lactate  levels  did  not  add  enough independent predictive power to be included in our simple model. Lactate levels have been reported to be a good predictor of mortality in sepsis and have good discriminative power, with an AUC of 0.66. 30  Although lactate was not included in the simple prognostic model of this study, further research on the predictive value of lactate levels is of interest. In contrast, our analyses showed no significant difference in WBC between survivors and non-survivors. WBC is included in SAPS-3, and although it is clinically used to follow the course of an infection, the prognostic value of WBC in sepsis is poorly studied. One prior study has indicated  that  WBC  is  not  of  predictive  value  in  sepsis patients. 31   Likewise,  while  tachycardia  is  included  in SAPS-3, heart rate was not shown to correlate with 30-day mortality in our analyses.  Although the correlation between heart rate and mortality in sepsis is poorly studied,  some  studies  have  suggested  that  tachycardia  and relative tachycardia (the ratio between heart rate and body temperature)  are  associated  with  increased  mortality  in sepsis. 32,33 Since we did not have access to data on baseline SOFA scores  and  the  Sepsis-3  criteria  include  an  acute  SOFA score  increase  of  two  points  or  more,  we  assumed  all admitted patients to have a baseline SOFA score of 0. This means that patients with chronic organ failure and a baseline SOFA score of 1 or more may have been falsely categorised  as  having  sepsis  due  to  the  study  design.  The relatively high median SOFA score in our results implies that most patients would likely have had an acute SOFA score increase of at least two points anyway. Our results noted a higher prevalence of asthma/COPD in  survivors than non-survivors. Exacerbations of COPD may be clinically challenging to distinguish from sepsis. Furthermore, COPD patients also tend to obtain antibiotic treatment more liberally than others, and antibiotic treatment 24 h prior, to 72  h after ICU admission was one of the inclusion  criteria.  Thus,  it  is  possible  that  some  patients with COPD were falsely included as septic patients in this study. Since COPD patients admitted to the ICU because of respiratory failure have relatively low mortality, this may explain  an  overrepresentation  of  asthma/COPD  in  survivors. 34  Another minor limitation in this study was the lack of  documentation  of  diabetes  type.  According  to  earlier publications, patients with type 2 diabetes have increased mortality in sepsis. 35,36  Our study showed no such increase, perhaps because the two types of diabetes were not distinguished in the documentation process. This  study  was  conducted  at  multiple  centres  and included a relatively large patient sample, strengthening our results. Furthermore, the two databases used for data collection were not explicitly designed for this study but had multiple purposes, making them less susceptible to confirmation  bias.  Several  data  collectors  documented data using one standardised and clearly defined guideline, which reduced the risk of systematic errors. However, it is worth noting that the AUC of our simple six-parameter model, like the AUC for SAPS-3 in this study, indicates only a moderately performing model. Our model needs external validation in other Sepsis-3 cohorts in the ICU before its utility can be confirmed. Furthermore,  this  six-parameter  model  can  only  be used on a group level, not to estimate individual patients' mortality risk. Further  research  on  the  calibration  of  this  model  is needed  to  make  the  mortality  prediction  of  individual patients possible, which is necessary to make this model an equal alternative to SAPS-3. Simple and accurate riskadjustment  models  are  important  for  easy  but  accurate quality control of sepsis care and the design of simple yet robust studies on sepsis in intensive care. Our suggested six-parameter model is undoubtedly a good candidate for such a model.

## Conclusion
Although sepsis is very common in the ICU, SAPS-3 has a lower prognostic value in ICU admissions fulfilling the Sepsis-3  criteria  than  in  the  general  ICU  population. SOFA score upon ICU admission has poorer performance than SAPS-3 but was not designed with mortality prediction in mind. A simpler six-parameter method using age, immunosuppression, GCS score, body temperature, CRP and  bilirubin  on  admission  predicts  30-day  mortality upon  ICU  admission  for  sepsis  patients  just  as  well  as SAPS-3. These findings could allow the design of studies with  access  to  less  data  without  compromising  quality and facilitate performance monitoring.

## Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all staff at the ICUs of Skåne University Hospital in  Malmö  and  Lund,  Helsingborg  Hospital  and Kristianstad Central Hospital for their contribution to this study.

## Author's contributions
HK and AF conceived and designed the study. HK, AL, ML, and PJ collected data. HK, AL and AF performed the calculations and prepared the figures. HK, AL and AF wrote the draft manuscript. HK, ML, PJ and AF finalised the manuscript.

## Declaration of conflicting interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

## Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: HK is funded by Kristianstad Central Hospital, Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care. AF is funded by governmental grants for clinical research within the National Health Services (ALF YF).

## ORCID iD
Hazem Koozi https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5892-3524

## Supplemental Material
Supplemental material for this article is available online.

## References
Lengquist M, Lundberg OHM, Spångfors M , et al. Sepsis is underreported in Swedish intensive care units: a retrospective  observational  multicentre  study. Acta  Anaesthesiol Scand 2020; 64: 1167-1176. Vincent  JL,  Lefrant  JY,  Kotfis  K , et  al.  Comparison  of European  ICU  patients  in  2012  (ICON)  versus  2002 (SOAP). Intensive Care Med 2018; 44: 337-344. Rudd KE, Johnson SC, Agesa KM , et al. Global, regional, and  national  sepsis  incidence  and  mortality,  1990-2017: analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study. Lancet 2020; 395: 200-211. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW , et al. The third international  consensus  definitions  for  sepsis  and  septic shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA 2016; 315: 801-810. Vincent JL and Moreno R. Clinical review: scoring systems in the critically ill. Crit Care 2010; 14: 207. Metnitz PG, Moreno RP, Almeida E , et al. SAPS 3-from evaluation of the patient to evaluation of the intensive care unit.  Part  1:  Objectives,  methods  and  cohort  description. Intensive Care Med 2005; 31: 1336-1344. Falcão  ALE,  Barros  AGA,  Bezerra  AAM , et  al.  The prognostic  accuracy  evaluation  of  SAPS  3,  SOFA  and APACHE II scores for mortality prediction in the surgical ICU: an external validation study and decision-making analysis. Ann Intensive Care 2019; 9: 18. Keegan  MT,  Gajic  O  and  Afessa  B.  Comparison  of APACHE III, APACHE IV, SAPS 3, and MPM0III and influence  of  resuscitation  status  on  model  performance. Chest 2012; 142: 851-858. Ledoux D, Canivet JL, Preiser JC , et al. SAPS 3 admission score:  an  external  validation  in  a  general  intensive  care population. Intensive Care Med 2008; 34: 1873-1877. Ma QB, Fu YW, Feng L , et al. Performance of simplified acute  physiology  score  3  in  predicting  hospital  mortality in Emergency Intensive Care Unit. Chin Med J 2017; 130: 1544-1551. Metnitz B, Schaden E, Moreno R , et al. Austrian validation  and  customization  of  the  SAPS  3  admission  score. Intensive Care Med 2009; 35: 616-622.  Mbongo  CL,  Monedero  P,  Guillen-Grima  F , et al. Performance of SAPS3, compared with APACHE II and SOFA, to predict hospital mortality in a general ICU in Southern  Europe. Eur  J  Anaesthesiol 2009;  26:  940945. Basile-Filho A, Lago AF, Menegueti MG , et al. The use of SAPS 3, SOFA, and Glasgow coma scale to predict mortality in patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage: a retrospective cohort study. Medicine 2018; 97: e12769. Raith EP, Udy AA, Bailey M , et al. Prognostic accuracy of the SOFA Score, SIRS criteria, and qSOFA score for In-hospital mortality among adults with suspected infection admitted to the Intensive Care Unit. JAMA 2017; 317: 290-300. Vincent JL, Moreno R, Takala J , et al. The SOFA (Sepsisrelated  organ  failure  assessment)  score  to  describe  organ dysfunction/failure.  On  behalf  of  the  Working  Group  on Sepsis-Related Problems of the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Intensive Care Med 1996; 22: 707-710. Cuschieri  S.  The  STROBE  guidelines. Saudi  J  Anaesth 2019; 13: S31-S34. Nordlund P and Walther S. Riskjusteringsmodeller inom svensk intensivvård, https://www.icuregswe.org/ globalassets/publikationer/fokusrapporter/fokusrapport_ riskjustering_i_sir.pdf (2019, accessed 10 October 2019).  DeLong ER, DeLong DM  and Clarke-Pearson DL. Comparing the areas under two or more correlated receiver operating characteristic curves: a nonparametric approach. Biometrics 1988; 44: 837-845. Holmgren G, Andersson P, Jakobsson A , et  al.  Artificial neural networks improve and simplify intensive care mortality prognostication: a national cohort study of 217,289 first-time intensive care unit admissions. J Intensive Care 2019; 7: 44. Ferreira FL, Bota DP, Bross A , et al. Serial evaluation of the SOFA score to predict outcome in critically ill patients. JAMA 2001; 286: 1754-1758. Haniffa R, Isaam I, De Silva AP , et al. Performance of critical care prognostic scoring systems in low and middle-income countries: a systematic review. Crit Care 2018; 22: 18. Kushimoto  S,  Gando  S,  Saitoh  D , et  al.  The  impact  of body temperature abnormalities on the disease severity and outcome in patients with severe sepsis: an analysis from a multicenter, prospective survey of severe sepsis. Crit Care 2013; 17: R271. Lee B, Inui D, Suh G , et al. Association of body temperature and antipyretic treatments with mortality of critically ill  patients  with  and  without  sepsis:  multi-centered  prospective observational study. Crit Care 2012; 16: R33. Young PJ, Saxena M, Beasley R , et al. Early peak temperature and mortality in critically ill patients with or without infection. Intensive Care Med 2012; 38: 437-444. Zhai R, Sheu CC, Su L , et  al.  Serum  bilirubin  levels  on ICU  admission  are  associated  with  ARDS  development and mortality in sepsis. Thorax 2009; 64: 784-790. Patel  JJ,  Taneja  A,  Niccum  D , et  al.  The  association  of serum bilirubin levels on the outcomes of severe sepsis. J Intensive Care Med 2015; 30: 23-29. Koozi H, Lengquist M and Frigyesi A. C-reactive protein as a prognostic factor in intensive care admissions for sepsis: a Swedish multicenter study. J Crit Care 2020; 56: 73-79. Villar J, Short JH and Lighthall G. Lactate predicts both short- and long-term mortality in patients with and without sepsis. Infect Dis 2019; 12: 1178633719862776. Thomas-Rueddel  DO,  Poidinger  B,  Weiss  M , et al. Hyperlactatemia is an independent predictor of mortality and denotes distinct subtypes of severe sepsis and septic shock. J Crit Care 2015; 30: 439.e1-439.e6. Liu  Z,  Meng  Z,  Li  Y , et  al.  Prognostic  accuracy  of  the serum lactate level, the SOFA score and the qSOFA score for  mortality  among adults with sepsis. Scand J Trauma Resusc Emerg Med 2019; 27: 51. Suberviola B, Castellanos-Ortega A, González-Castro A , et al. [Prognostic value of procalcitonin, C-reactive protein and leukocytes in septic shock]. Med Intensiva 2012; 36: 177-184. Parker MM, Shelhamer JH, Natanson C , et al. Serial cardiovascular  variables  in  survivors  and  nonsurvivors  of human  septic  shock:  heart  rate  as  an  early  predictor  of prognosis. Crit Care Med 1987; 15: 923-929. Leibovici L, Gafter-Gvili A, Paul M , et al. Relative tachycardia in patients with sepsis: an independent risk factor for mortality. QJM 2007; 100: 629-634. Gadre SK, Duggal A, Mireles-Cabodevila E , et al. Acute respiratory failure  requiring  mechanical  ventilation  in severe  chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease  (COPD). Medicine 2018; 97: e0487. Frydrych LM, Bian G, O'Lone DE , et al. Obesity and type 2  diabetes  mellitus  drive  immune  dysfunction,  infection development,  and  sepsis  mortality. J  Leukoc  Biol 2018; 104: 525-534. Tiwari S, Pratyush DD, Gahlot A , et al. Sepsis in diabetes: a bad duo. Diabetes Metab Syndr 2011; 5: 222-227.

