## One-year mortality prediction for patients with sepsis: a nomogram integrating lactic dehydrogenase and clinical characteristics
Jin Wang 1 , Weiyu Fei 2 and Qianying Song 2*

## Abstract
Background To explore the association between myocardial enzymes and one-year mortality, and establish a nomogram integrating myocardial enzymes and clinical characteristics to predict one-year mortality among sepsis patients. Methods Data of 1,983 sepsis patients were extracted from Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care III database in this retrospective cohort study. All participants were randomly split into the training set for the development of model and testing set for the internal validation at the ratio of 7:3. Univariate logistic regression was used to screen variables with statistical differences which were made for stepwise regression, obtaining the predictors associated with one-year mortality of sepsis patients. Adopted multivariate logistic regression to assess the relationship between myocardial enzymes and one-year mortality of sepsis patients. A nomogram was established in predicting the one-year survival status of sepsis patients, and the performance of developed model were compared with LDH alone, sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA), simplified acute physiology score II (SAPS II) by receiver operator characteristic, calibration, and decision curves analysis. Results The result found that LDH was associated with one-year mortality of sepsis patients [odds ratio = 1.28, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.18-1.52]. Independent predictors, including age, gender, ethnicity, potassium, calcium, albumin, hemoglobin, alkaline phosphatase, vasopressor, Elixhauser score, respiratory failure, and LDH were identified and used to establish the nomogram (LDH-model) for predicting one-year mortality for sepsis patients. The predicted performance [area under curve (AUC) = 0.773, 95%CI: 0.748-0.798] of this developed nomogram in the training and testing sets (AUC = 0.750, 95%CI: 0.711-0.789), which was superior to that of LDH alone, SOFA score, SAPS II score. Additionally, calibration curve indicated that LDH-model may have a good agreement between the predictive and actual outcomes, while decision curve analysis demonstrated clinical utility of the LDH-model. Conclusion LDH level was related to the risk of one-year mortality in sepsis patients. A prediction model based on LDH and clinical features was developed to predict one-year mortality risk of sepsis patients, surpassing the predictive ability of LDH alone as well as conventional SAPS II and SOFA scoring systems. Keywords Lactic dehydrogenase, One-year mortality, Prediction model, Sepsis *Correspondence: Qianying Song qianyingsong0623@outlook.com 1 Health Management Center, The Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116023, People's Republic of China 2 Emergency Intensive Care Unit, The Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116023, People's Republic of China

## Background
Sepsis, as a kind of complex disorder, is characterized by  severe  and  potentially  lethal  infection  accompanied  by  dysfunction  of  vital  organs  [1,  2].  At  present, the  incidence  and  mortality  of  sepsis  remains  high, which  was  considered  as  one  of  the  leading  causes  of © The Author(s) 2023. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data. death  worldwide  [3].  The  annual  incidence  of  sepsis in  the  United  States  was  estimated  to  exceed  1.5  million cases, resulting in approximately 250,000 fatalities [4]. Previous studies have indicated a high incidence of myocardial organic damage in the early stage of sepsis, rendering these patients susceptible to heart failure and arrhythmia,  thereby  contributing  to  a  poor  prognosis among  septic  patients  [5-7].  The  high  mortality  and morbidity of sepsis impose a substantial financial burden on the healthcare system [8]. Therefore, it is crucial to identify the prognostic factors associated with sepsis aimed to provide accurate  treatment  and  increase  the chances of survival. The  myocardial  injury  has  been  widely  recognized  as the main manifestation of multiple organ dysfunction in sepsis [9], and it has been observed that sepsis may cause myocardial damage. Myocardial enzymes are important indicators  in  assessing  both  myocardial  function  and myocardial  damage.  In  general,  myocardial  enzymes included creatine kinase (CK), creatine kinase isoenzyme (CK-MB),  aspartic transoxygenase (AST), and lactic dehydrogenase (LDH). The levels of myocardial enzymes could reflect the extent of cellular damages and vary with the severity of infection [10]. The levels of LDH have also been observed to increase in accordance with the severity of the infection, suggesting that LDH levels may serve as  a  prognostic  factor  for  sepsis  [11].  In  addition,  Jeon, et  al.  have  reported  that  LDH  to  albumin  (LDH/ALB) ratio  might  be  a  prognostic  factor  among  patients  with severe  infection  requiring  intensive  care  [10].  Clinical decision tools could help clinician to identify those at risk of poor outcomes for sepsis patients. Nowadays, several studies have developed prediction models to predict the prognosis  of  sepsis  patients,  including  machine  learning model, Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score,  Quick  SOFA  (qSOFA)  score,  and  Logistic  Organ Dysfunction System (LODS) score [12, 13]. Nevertheless, to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  there  were few studies to combine clinical features to make a diagnosis to date. Herein, the purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship  between  various  myocardial  enzymes  and one-year mortality among patients with sepsis using the Medical  Information  Mart  for  Intensive  Care  (MIMICIII)  database,  and  to  establish  a  prediction  model  in which combining clinical features in predicting the risk of one-year mortality in patients with sepsis.

## Data sources and study population
All information of this study were obtained from MIMIC-III  database,  which  is  a  large, single-center, freely  available  database  [14].  The  database  contained comprehensive clinical  data  of  patients  admitted  to  the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, Massachusetts between 2001-2012, and was released on 2016. Over 40,000 patients who have been exempted from personal information were included in this database [15]. We selected patients from MIMIC-III database between  2001-2012  in  this  retrospective  cohort  study. We  analyzed  only  septic  patients  admitted  to  the  ICU for  the  first  time.  The  inclusion  criteria:  (1)  patients were  diagnosed  with  sepsis  was  defined  as  life-threatening  organ  dysfunction  caused  by  a  dysregulated  host response  to  infection  according  to  the  Sepsis-3  criteria  [16,  17];  (2)  patients  had  complete  data  on  myocardial  enzymes.  The  exclusion  criteria  are  as  follows:  (1) patients aged < 18 years; (2) admission time < 24 h in the ICU;  (3)  survival  time < 1  day  (Fig.  1).  The  experimental  protocol  was  approved  by  the  Institutional  Review Boards  of  Beth  Israel  Deaconess  Medical  Center  (Boston, MA) and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Cambridge, MA). This study did not require an approval of the Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University ethics  committee because the data about included patients derived from publicly available database. All individuals provided  written  informed  consent  before  participating in the study. All methods were carried out in accordance with  relevant  guidelines  and  regulations  (declaration  of Helsinki). Fig. 1 Flowchart showing the selection of study population. (ICU, medical intensive care unit)

## Potential predictors
The demographic data about eligible patients were extracted from the MIMIC-III database: age (years), gender, ethnicity, marital status. The vital signs and laboratory  values:  respiratory  rate  (times/min),  temperature ( ℃ ), heart rate (times/min), systolic blood pressure (SBP, mmHg),  diastolic  blood  pressure  (DBP,  mmHg),  mean arterial  pressure  (MAP,  mmHg),  pulse  oxygen  saturation    (SPO 2 ),  white  blood  cell  count  (WBC,  K/uL),  red blood  count  (RBC,  m/uL),  sodium  (mEq/L),  potassium (mEq/L),  phosphate  (mg/dL),  calcium  (mg/dL),  magnesium (mg/dL), platelet count (PLT, K/uL), pH, lactate (mmol/L),  glucose  (mg/dL),  creatinine  (mg/dL),  blood urea nitrogen (BUN, mg/dL), bicarbonate (mEq/L), albumin,  total  bilirubin  (TBIL,  mg/dL),  hematocrit  (%), hemoglobin (g/dL), mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), alanine aminotransferase  (ALT,  U/L),  LDH  (U/L),  CK  (U/L), CK-MB (U/L), AST (U/L), oxygen partial pressure   (PO 2 ), partial pressure of carbon dioxide   (PCO 2 ). Comorbidities: congestive  heart  failure,  malignant  tumor,  atrial  fibrillation,  respiratory  failure,  septic  shock  and  Elixhauser score. Severity score: sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA)  score  and  simplified  acute  physiology  score  II (SAPS II). Outcomes data: intensive care unit (ICU) type, length of stay, renal replacement therapy (RRT), ventilation and vasopressor. All variables were collected within 24 h of patients' admission to the ICU. Length of stay was considered as the admission time in the ICU. To  describe  comorbidities  more  succinctly,  we  used Elixhauser score. Elixhauser score includes 30 comorbidities,  such  as  hypertension,  diabetes,  renal  failure,  hypothyroidism, cardiac arrhythmias and so on [18, 19].

## Outcomes and follow-up
The  outcome  was  one-year  survival  status  of  sepsis patients  after  ICU  admission.  Follow-up  started  at  the time  of  patients'  admission,  and  was  terminated  when death occurred. The follow-up duration was one-year and the  median  follow-up  time  was  143.19  (15.45,  365.00) days.

## Statistical analysis
Kolmogorov-Smirnov  was  used  to  test  the  normality of measurement  data.  Mean ± standard deviation (Mean ± SD)  and  Median  and  quartile  spacing  [M  (Q1, Q3)] described the normal and non-normal distribution of the measurement data, respectively; and the comparison between the two groups was performed by Student's t-test  and  rank-sum  test,  respectively.  The  categorical data was depicted by the number of cases and composition ratio n (%), and difference of groups were compared by  χ 2 test.  These  missing  values  were  interpolated  by using multiple interpolation method, and sensitivity analysis was performed by using data filled before and after between groups (Supplemental Table 1). First, the total participants were randomly split into the training set for the development of model and the testing set for the internal validation of model at the ratio of 7:3,  and  we  conducted a balance test between two sets. Then, the patients in the training set were subsequently categorized  into  two  groups,  namely  the  death  group and  the  survival  group,  based  on  their  one-year  mortality  or  survival  status.  Subsequently,  a  comparison  of variables was conducted between these two groups. We utilized  univariate  logistic  regression  to  identify  variables  exhibiting  statistically  significant  differences,  and made  these  variables  to  stepwise  regression  to  obtain predictors  associated  with  one-year  mortality  of  sepsis  patients.  A  multivariate  logistic  regression  analysis was introduced to assess the relationship between various myocardial enzymes and one-year mortality among patients with sepsis: Model 1 was a coarse model; Model 2  adjusted  age,  gender,  ethnicity,  potassium,  calcium, albumin, hemoglobin, ALP, vasopressor, Elixhauser score, and respiratory failure. Subsequently, a prediction model combining  myocardial  enzymes  and  other  predictors was  established  in  predicting  the  one-year  survival  status of patients with sepsis. The performance of developed model was compared with SOFA score, SAPSII score by some  indexes,  including  receiver  operator  characteristic curve (ROC) analysis, calibration curve and decision curve analysis (DCA). The inter-group comparisons were performed using SAS 9.4 software, and all statistics were performed  using  R  3.6.3  software.  All  statistical  tests were conducted by two-sided tests, and P <  0.05 was considered as statistically significant.

## Participants' characteristics
We  excluded  some  patients  who  were  aged < 18  years ( n = 10), were < 24  h  of  admission  time  in  the  ICU ( n = 400)  and  were < 1  day  of  survival  time  ( n = 115).  A total  of  1,983  eligible  patients  were  eventually  included, which were randomly divided into training set ( n = 1,388) and testing set ( n = 595). The baseline characteristics  for  all  enrolled  patients  were  listed  in  Supplemental  Table  2.  The  mean  age  of  the  total  population  was 67.79 ± 15.31 years old. 46.44% of sepsis patients had congestive  heart  failure,  26.42%  had  a  history  of  malignant tumor,  and  42.16%  had  atrial  fibrillation.  The  median Elixhauser score was 24.00 for total population. The oneyear  mortality  rate  of  sepsis  patients  reached  56.13%  in this  study.  Additionally,  the  differences  of  all  variables between  the  training  and  testing  sets  were  not  statistically  significant  ( P >  0.05),  indicating  that  the  data  from two  groups  were  well-balanced  and  comparable.  As shown in Table 1, patients in the training set were classified  into  death  group  ( n = 788)  and  survival  group ( n = 600) based on one-year survival status. We observed that  some  underlying  diseases  were  significantly  different between the two groups, including congestive heart failure, malignant tumor, atrial fibrillation, respiratory failure, and Elixhauser score. The number of sepsis patients  with  congestive  heart  failure,  malignant  tumor, atrial fibrillation, and respiratory failure was higher in the death group compared to the survival group.

## The association of different myocardial enzymes and one-year mortality among patients with sepsis
We  performed  a  univariate  logistic  regression  analysis, and the result showed that age, gender, ethnicity, potassium,  calcium,  albumin,  hemoglobin,  ALP,  vasopressor, Elixhauser score and respiratory failure were associated with  one-year  mortality  of  sepsis  patients,  which  were possible predictors (Supplemental Table 3). Table 2 displays the relationship between different myocardial enzymes and one-year mortality among patients with sepsis. The result indicated that LDH was associated with the risk of one-year mortality among sepsis patients [Model 1: odds ratio (OR) = 1.28, 95% confidence interval (CI):  1.09-1.49, P = 0.002],  with  an  adjusted  OR  of  1.28 (Model  2,  95%  CI:  1.18-1.52, P = 0.005).  Furthermore, we also found that there were no statistically significant differences between the AST, CK, CK-MB and one-year mortality for sepsis patients.

## Development of prediction model (LDH-model)
A prediction model (LDH-model) integrating LDH, age, gender,  ethnicity,  potassium,  calcium,  albumin,  hemoglobin,  ALP,  vasopressor,  Elixhauser  score,  and  respiratory failure was established in the training set. In order to visualize the developed LDH-model, a nomogram was plotted to predict the probability of the one-year mortality  of  patients  with  sepsis  (Fig.  2).  An  online  prediction nomogram: https://  songqy.  shiny  apps.  io/  DynNo  mapp/

## Sample
We randomly chose a male patient with sepsis who age was  81  years  old,  LDH  was  371  IU/L,  potassium  was 4.8  mEq/L,  calcium  was  11.1  mg/dL,  albumin  was  4  g/ dL,  hemoglobin  was  8.9  g/dL,  ALP  was  159  IU/L,  had not used vasopressor, Elixhauser score was 42, and had respiratory  failure.  The  total  point  was  360,  and  the predicted  probability  of  one-year  mortality  was  0.886 (Fig. 3), which suggested a higher risk of one-year mortality and was consistent with the actual outcome of the patient.

## Validation and comparison of prediction model
In  order  to  verify  the  performance  of  the  established LDH-model,  which  combines  LDH  and  clinical  features,  we  adopted  data  from  the  testing  set  for  internal validation.  According  to  the  ROC  analysis,  the  AUC  of LDH-model  was  0.773  (95%CI:  0.748-0.798)  with  the sensitivity  of  0.761  (95%CI:  0.732-0.791),  the  specificity  of  0.662  (95%CI:  0.624-0.700),  and  the  accuracy  of 0.718  (95%CI:  0.695-0.742)  in  the  training  set,  and  the AUC was 0.750 (95%CI: 0.711-0.789) with the sensitivity of 0.751 (95%CI: 0.704-0.798), the specificity of 0.619 (95%CI: 0.561-0.676), and the accuracy of 0.691 (95%CI: 0.654-0.728) in the testing set (Table 3, Fig. 4). Simultaneously,  Table  3  also  revealed  that  LDH-model  exhibited superior predictive performance compared to LDH alone, SOFA and SAPS II scores in both datasets. Not  only  that, the calibration  curve  was  used  to describe the fitting ability of the LDH-model in the training and testing sets. Figure 5 exhibits that the established LDH-model has a better agreement between the predictive  and  actual  outcomes than LDH alone, SOFA score, and SAPS II score. Additionally, we also plotted the DCA curves to compare clinical application of this developed LDH-model and LDH alone, SOFA score, SAPS II score (Fig.  6).  It  could  be  found  from  the  DCA  curves  that under  the  same  risk,  the  benefits  of  LDH-model  were higher  than  LDH  alone,  SOFA  score,  SAPS  II  score, which indicating that the established LDH-model has a higher clinical value than other scores.

## Discussion
In this retrospective cohort study, we assessed the relationship  between  various  myocardial  enzymes  and  risk of one-year mortality among sepsis patients. The findings showed  that  LDH  was  associated  with  the  risk  of  oneyear mortality of sepsis patients. Importantly, we developed  a  predicting  model  integrating  LDH  and  clinical features (including age, gender, ethnicity, potassium, calcium, albumin, hemoglobin, ALP, vasopressor, Elixhauser score and respiratory failure) and draw a nomogram, predicting  the  risk  of  one-year  mortality  for  patients  with sepsis.  The  established  LDH-model  might  have  a  good performance by internally validated compared with LDH alone, SOFA score, SAPS II score. LDH is widely distributed in various tissues and cells, serving  as  a  diagnostic  marker  for  diseases  and  tissue damage [20]. Several studies have reported that increased ICU Intensive care unit, CCU Coronary care unit, CSRU Cardiac surgery recovery unit, MICU Medical intensive care unit, SICU Surgical intensive care unit, TSICU Trauma/ surgical intensive care unit, SBP Systolic blood pressure, DBP Diastolic blood pressure, MAP Mean arterial pressure, SPO 2 Pulse oxygen saturation, WBC White blood cell count, RBC Red blood count, PLT Platelet count, BUN Blood urea nitrogen, TBIL Total bilirubin, MCHC Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, ALP Alkaline phosphatase, ALT Alanine aminotransferase, CK Creatine kinase, CK-MB Creatine kinase isoenzyme, AST Aspartic transoxygenase, LDH Lactic dehydrogenase, PO 2 Oxygen partial pressure, PCO 2 Partial pressure of carbon dioxide, SOFA Sequential organ failure assessment, SAPS Simplified acute physiology score, RRT Renal replacement therapy Model 1, crude model; Model 2, adjusted age, gender, ethnicity, potassium, calcium, albumin, hemoglobin, alkaline phosphatase, vasopressor, Elixhauser score and respiratory failure CK Creatine kinase, CK-MB Creatine kinase isoenzyme, AST Aspartic transoxygenase, LDH Lactic dehydrogenase, OR Odds ratio, CI Confidence interval LDH level was associated with the higher risk of severity and mortality of some diseases, such as coronavirus disease 2019, critically ill patients with acute kidney injury, postoperative  pneumonia  in  patients  with  aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage so on [21-23], and has been assessed as a prognostic factor for many diseases. In general,  the  progression  of  the  infection  may  cause  some changes  in  the  levels  of  several  biomarkers.  Lu,  et  al., pointed  out  that  serum  LDH  was  probably  associated with 28-day mortality among patients with sepsis [11]. In our study, LDH level was found to be associated with the risk of the one-year mortality among patients with sepsis. The LDH facilitates the conversion of pyruvate into lactic acid. As a metabolite of aerobic glycolysis, large amounts of  lactic  acid  accumulate  inflammatory  mediators  and lactate during glucose metabolic reprogramming, which may  potentially  contribute  to  increased  mortality  in patients with sepsis [11]. Table 1 The patients' characteristics of survival group and death group in the training set Table 1 (continued) Table 2 The association of different myocardial enzymes and one-year mortality among patients with sepsis Fig. 2 A nomogram in predicting the probability of the one-year mortality of patients with sepsis. (LDH, lactic dehydrogenase; ALP , alkaline phosphatase) Nowadays,  several conventional prognostic scoring systems  (including  SAPS  II  and  SOFA)  and  prediction model have been developed to predict the mortality risk of patients with sepsis [24]. In the study of Hu et al., they evaluated  the  value  of  SAPS  II  and  SOFA  scoring  systems on predicting ICU mortality in patients with sepsis, and  the  result  found  that  the  SOFA  and  SAPS  II  scoring systems could predict ICU mortality in patients with sepsis,  but  SAPSII  scores  had  a  better  predictive  value than SOFA scores [25]. Hou and colleagues developed a machine learning approach using XGboost to predict the 30-days mortality for MIMIC-III patients with sepsis-3. Simultaneously, they also pointed out that the specificity and sensitivity of SAPS II scoring systems were relatively low,  and  the  predictive  performance  was  worse  than multivariate predictive models [14]. In this retrospective cohort study, we explored the association of myocardial enzymes and the prognosis of sepsis. An interesting study is that we developed a prediction model integrating LDH and age, gender, ethnicity, potassium, calcium, albumin, hemoglobin, ALP, vasopressor, Elixhauser score and respiratory failure to predict the risk of one-year mortality for  sepsis  patients.  The  ROC,  calibration  and  DCA curves have demonstrated the good performance of the developed LDH-model compared with traditional SAPS II, SOFA scoring systems and LDH alone in one-year prediction  of  probability  of  septic  mortality.  The  proposed LDH-model might assist clinicians  to  further  know  the prognosis of patients suffering from sepsis, and customize  precise  management  and  treatment,  which  will  be crucial to improve the survival chances of patients. Fig. 3 An example for the application of the nomogram. (LDH, lactic dehydrogenase; ALP , alkaline phosphatase) The strength of this  study  was  mainly  as  follows:  this study included a relatively large sample size, which supported  the  credibility  of  the  conclusion.  In  addition,  it is the first time to predict one-year mortality of patients with  sepsis  by  the  prediction  model  integrating  LDH and  clinical  features,  and  compared  to  traditional  scoring  system  and  LDH  alone,  and  meanwhile  verified  by nomogram,  ROC  curves,  calibration  curves  and  DCA curves. Our study had several limitations. Firstly, because of  all  data  was  collected  from  MIMIC-III  database,  and most of sepsis patients were white, which might cause a potential bias. Secondly, we excluded some patients who had missing data on myocardial enzymes. These patients might  affect  the  representativeness  of  the  sample,  and there may be an introduce bias. More prospective studies with larger sample sizes are still needed in the future. Thirdly,  because  the  population  used  in  this  study  was derived  from  MIMIC-III  database,  we  could  not  know the interval time between data collection and sepsis diagnosis. In addition, we did not an external validation about the  established  LDH-model.  Despite  these  limitations, the  prediction  model  integrating  LDH  and  clinical  features also may have an acceptable accuracy in predicting one-year mortality risk in patients with sepsis.

## Conclusion
LDH level was associated with one-year mortality risk among patients with sepsis. We developed a nomogram combining  LDH  and  clinical  characteristics  (LDHmodel)  to  predict  one-year  mortality  risk  of  sepsis patients, surpassing the predictive ability of LDH alone as well as conventional SAPS II and SOFA scoring systems.  This  developed  nomogram  may  assist  clinicians LDH-model: a predicting model integrating LDH and clinical features (including age, gender, ethnicity, potassium, calcium, albumin, hemoglobin, alkaline phosphatase, vasopressor, Elixhauser score, and respiratory failure) Fig. 4 Receiver operating characteristic curves of prediction models in the training and testing sets. (AUC, area under the curve; CI, confidence interval; LDH, lactic dehydrogenase; SOFA, sequential organ failure assessment; SAPS, simplified acute physiology score) Table 3 Comparison of models in predicting the one-year mortality of sepsis patients LDH Lactic dehydrogenase, SOFA Sequential organ failure assessment, SAPS Simplified acute physiology score, PPV Positive predictive value, NPV Negative predictive value, AUC Area under the curve, CI Confidence interval to  further  know  the  prognosis  of  patients  suffering from  sepsis,  and  customize  precise  management  and treatment, which will be crucial to improve the survival chances  of  patients.  A  large  external  cohort  would  be still  needed  to  further  enhance  the  effectiveness  and credibility  of  our  model  in  future  studies.  In  addition, the  developed  nomogram  might  be  widely  applied  in clinical  practice  to  facilitate  medical  decision-making. However,  future  research  could  also  focus  on  simplifying  the  LDH-model  and  further  expanding  its applicability, such as integrating it into mobile devices or computer applications. Fig. 5 Calibration curves of prediction models in the training and testing sets. (LDH, lactic dehydrogenase; SOFA, sequential organ failure assessment; SAPS, simplified acute physiology score) Fig. 6 Decision curve analysis of prediction models. (LDH, lactic dehydrogenase; SOFA, sequential organ failure assessment; SAPS, simplified acute physiology score)

## Abbreviations
CK Creatine kinase CK-MB Creatine kinase isoenzyme AST Aspartic transoxygenase LDH Lactic dehydrogenase LDH/ALB LDH to albumin SOFA Sequential Organ Failure Assessment qSOFA Quick SOFA MIMIC-III Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care SBP Systolic blood pressure DBP Diastolic blood pressure MAP Mean arterial pressure SPO 2 Pulse oxygen saturation WBC White blood cell count RBC Red blood count PLT Platelet count BUN Blood urea nitrogen TBIL Total bilirubin MCHC Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration ALP Alkaline phosphatase ALT Alanine aminotransferase PO2 Oxygen partial pressure PCO 2 Partial pressure of carbon dioxide SOFA Sequential organ failure assessment ICU Intensive care unit RRT Renal replacement therapy

## Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at https://  doi. org/  10.  1186/  s12879-  023-  08636-8. Additional file 1: Supplemental Table 1. Sensitivity analysis of missing data before and after interpolation. Supplemental Table 2. The characteristics of patients in training set and testing set. Supplemental Table 3. The screening of predictors.

## Acknowledgements
Not applicable.

## Authors' contributions
JW and QS designed the study. JW wrote the manuscript. WF collected, analyzed and interpreted the data. QS critically reviewed, edited and approved the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

## Funding
Not applicable.

## Availability of data and materials
The Datasets are available from the MIMIC-III database, https://  physi  onet.  org/ conte  nt/  mimic  iii/1.  4/.

## Ethics approval and consent to participate
This study did not require an approval of the Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University ethics committee because the data about included patients derived from publicly available database. All individuals provided written informed consent before participating in the study. All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations (declaration of Helsinki).

## Consent for publication
Not applicable.

## Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests. Received: 6 July 2023   Accepted: 24 September 2023

## References
Salomão R, Ferreira BL, Salomão MC, Santos SS, Azevedo LCP , Brunialti MKC. Sepsis: evolving concepts and challenges. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2019;52:e8595. Evans L, Rhodes A, Alhazzani W, Antonelli M, Coopersmith CM, French C, et al. Surviving sepsis campaign: international guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock 2021. Intensive Care Med. 2021;47:1181-247. Cecconi M, Evans L, Levy M, Rhodes A. Sepsis and septic shock. Lancet. 2018;392:75-87. Liu AC, Patel K, Vunikili RD, Johnson KW, Abdu F, Belman SK, et al. Sepsis in the era of data-driven medicine: personalizing risks, diagnoses, treatments and prognoses. Brief Bioinform. 2020;21:1182-95. Zhang E, Zhao X, Zhang L, Li N, Yan J, Tu K, et al. Minocycline promotes cardiomyocyte mitochondrial autophagy and cardiomyocyte autophagy to prevent sepsis-induced cardiac dysfunction by Akt/mTOR signaling. Apoptosis. 2019;24:369-81. Arfaras-Melainis A, Polyzogopoulou E, Triposkiadis F, Xanthopoulos A, Ikonomidis I, Mebazaa A, et al. Heart failure and sepsis: practical recommendations for the optimal management. Heart Fail Rev. 2020;25:183-94. Aibar J, Schulman S. New-Onset Atrial Fibrillation in Sepsis: A Narrative Review. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2021;47:18-25. Hassan N, Slight R, Weiand D, Vellinga A, Morgan G, Aboushareb F, et al. Preventing sepsis; how can artificial intelligence inform the clinical decision-making process? A systematic review. Int J Med Inform. 2021;150:104457. Qiu J, Xiao X, Gao X, Zhang Y. Ulinastatin protects against sepsis-induced myocardial injury by inhibiting NLRP3 inflammasome activation. Mol Med Rep. 2021;24:730. Jeon SY, Ryu S, Oh SK, Park JS, You YH, Jeong WJ, et al. Lactate dehydrogenase to albumin ratio as a prognostic factor for patients with severe infection requiring intensive care. Medicine (Baltimore). 2021;100:e27538. Lu J, Wei Z, Jiang H, Cheng L, Chen Q, Chen M, et al. Lactate dehydrogenase is associated with 28-day mortality in patients with sepsis: a retrospective observational study. J Surg Res. 2018;228:314-21. Nemati S, Holder A, Razmi F, Stanley MD, Clifford GD, Buchman TG. An Interpretable Machine Learning Model for Accurate Prediction of Sepsis in the ICU. Crit Care Med. 2018;46:547-53. Li Y, Yan C, Gan Z, Xi X, Tan Z, Li J, et al. Prognostic values of SOFA score, qSOFA score, and LODS score for patients with sepsis. Ann Palliat Med. 2020;9:1037-44. Hou N, Li M, He L, Xie B, Wang L, Zhang R, et al. Predicting 30-days mortality for MIMIC-III patients with sepsis-3: a machine learning approach using XGboost. J Transl Med. 2020;18:462. Lu Z, Zhang J, Hong J, Wu J, Liu Y, Xiao W, et al. Development of a Nomogram to Predict 28-Day Mortality of Patients With Sepsis-Induced Coagulopathy: An Analysis of the MIMIC-III Database. Front Med (Lausanne). 2021;8:661710. Seymour CW, Liu VX, Iwashyna TJ, Brunkhorst FM, Rea TD, Scherag A, et al. Assessment of Clinical Criteria for Sepsis: For the Third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA. 2016;315:762-74. Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, Shankar-Hari M, Annane D, Bauer M, et al. The Third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3). JAMA. 2016;315:801-10. van Walraven C, Austin PC, Jennings A, Quan H, Forster AJ. A modification of the Elixhauser comorbidity measures into a point system for hospital death using administrative data. Med Care. 2009;47:626-33. Liang YW, Zhu YF, Zhang R, Zhang M, Ye XL, Wei JR. Incidence, prognosis, and risk factors of sepsis-induced cardiomyopathy. World J Clin Cases. 2021;9:9452-68. Khan AA, Allemailem KS, Alhumaydhi FA, Gowder SJT, Rahmani AH. The Biochemical and Clinical Perspectives of Lactate Dehydrogenase: An Enzyme of Active Metabolism. Endocr Metab Immune Disord Drug Targets. 2020;20:855-68. Ding CY, Peng L, Lin YX, Yu LH, Wang DL, Kang DZ. Elevated Lactate Dehydrogenase Level Predicts Postoperative Pneumonia in Patients with Aneurysmal Subarachnoid Hemorrhage. World Neurosurg. 2019;129:e821-30. Li C, Ye J, Chen Q, Hu W, Wang L, Fan Y, et al. Elevated Lactate Dehydrogenase (LDH) level as an independent risk factor for the severity and mortality of COVID-19. Aging (Albany NY). 2020;12:15670-81. Zhang D, Shi L. Serum lactate dehydrogenase level is associated with inhospital mortality in critically Ill patients with acute kidney injury. Int Urol Nephrol. 2021;53:2341-8. Krasselt M, Baerwald C, Petros S, Seifert O. Mortality of Sepsis in Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Single-Center Retrospective Analysis and Comparison With a Control Group. J Intensive Care Med. 2021;36:766-74. Hu C, Hu B, Li Z, Yang X, Song H, Li J. [Comparison of four scoring systems for predicting ICU mortality in patients with sepsis]. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2020;40:513-8.

## Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

## Ready to submit y our researc h ?  Choose BMC and benefit fr om:
fast, convenient online submission thorough peer review by experienced researchers in your  eld rapid publication on acceptance support for research data, including large and complex data types gold Open Access which fosters wider collaboration and increased citations maximum visibility for your research: over 100M website views per year · At BMC, research is always in progress. Learn more biomedcentral.com/submissions

